Genesis 2:24 says of a man and a woman
who marry that they are
to “become one flesh.”
Now, that raises some questions:
Whose words are those?
What do they mean?
How can we show that we believe them?
And is there a good example
in the Bible of a couple who did?
Let’s start with looking at the context.
If you’d open your Bibles,
please, to Genesis chapter 2,
and we’ll start with verse 18—Genesis 2.
It reports: “Then Jehovah God said:
“‘It is not good for the man
to continue to be alone.
I am going to make a helper for him,
as a complement of him.’”
Continuing in verse 21:
“So Jehovah God caused the man to fall
into a deep sleep, and while he was sleeping,
“he took one of his ribs
and then closed up the flesh over its place.
“And Jehovah God built the rib
that he had taken from the man into a woman,
“and he brought her to the man.
“Then the man said:
“‘This is at last bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh.
“This one will be called Woman,
because from man she was taken.’
“That is why a man will leave
his father and his mother
and he will stick to his wife,
and they will become one flesh.”
So our first question is,
Whose words are these?
Adam’s?
No.
The only words attributed to Adam
are when he waxed poetic in verse 23.
And you can see that from the opening
and closing quotation marks in that verse.
Well, then it must have been
Moses’ words because,
after all,
he wrote the Bible book of Genesis.
No.
He was not present
at the time of the first marriage.
He did not start writing
until some 2,500 years later,
and even then,
he was writing what he was inspired to write.
Three Bible writers
use this expression, “one flesh”
—Matthew, Mark, and Paul.
And it’s Matthew who gives us
the clue as to whose words they are.
So let’s turn to Matthew chapter 19,
Matthew 19
beginning with verse 4.
And here Matthew writes and quotes Jesus;
it says: “In reply he [Jesus] said:
“‘Have you not read
that the one who created them
“‘from the beginning made
them male and female and said:
“‘“For this reason a man
will leave his father and his mother
“‘and will stick to his wife,
and the two will be one flesh”?
“‘So that they are no longer two,
but one flesh.
Therefore, what God has yoked together,
let no man put apart.’”
So Matthew makes it clear
that Jehovah said those words.
And shouldn’t that elevate in everyone’s mind
the sanctity of the marital union?
As Jesus said, ‘God created male and female’
—two complementary genders—
and he ‘yoked them together
in marriage as one flesh.’
Now, it’s interesting what
The Bible Exposition Commentary
says about this:
“God established marriage,
“and therefore only God
can control its character . . .
“It is a union between one man and one woman.
“God did not create two men and one woman,
“two women and one man,
two men, or two women.
“‘Group marriages,’ ‘gay marriages,’
“and other variations
are contrary to the will of God,
no matter what
some psychologists and jurists may say.”
“No court of law can change
what God has established.”
And those are comments we can agree with.
Now, our second question is, What do these
words mean: “They will become one flesh”?
Well, of course, the one-flesh relationship
certainly involves sexual union,
but it goes beyond that
because it includes a husband and wife
who have achieved mental,
emotional, and spiritual harmony.
They are to have a oneness
in their purpose and desires.
As Bible translator William Barclay
renders it at Matthew 19:5:
“The husband
will be joined inseparably to his wife.”
So in marriage, a man and a woman
are to become each other’s
closest partner in life.
Being “one flesh” means that they must always
be thinking more
of each other than of themselves,
that they must consider
each other in everything they do.
So when single people marry,
they need to shift
their thinking from mine to ours,
from me to we.
And so they must stop being single at heart
and come to be married at heart,
not just on paper.
Now, our third question is,
How can we show
that we believe these words?
Well, sad to say, many people these days
take a very casual attitude toward marriage,
and when the relationship becomes strained,
they just give up and walk out on their mate.
But that is not the Christian way.
Marriage is to be a lifelong relationship.
Just a few verses later on at Matthew 19:9,
Jesus taught that the only Scriptural ground
for dissolving marriage
is when an innocent mate
chooses not to forgive an adulterous partner.
And that is because sexual relations
outside the marriage bond
are a gross perversion
of the one-flesh union.
Now, let’s read Paul’s words about this
at 1 Corinthians chapter 6
—1 Corinthians 6:16;
he said: “Do you not know
that anyone who is joined to a prostitute
“is one body with her?
For ‘the two,’ says he,
‘will be one flesh.’”
So the adulterer pulls away
from his marriage mate
and makes himself
one flesh with a third person.
That, then,
is the only Scriptural basis for divorce.
But divorce is a very painful experience.
As one sociologist put it,
“Divorce is drastic surgery.”
To sever the one-flesh bond
between husband and wife
would be like sawing oneself asunder.
What, though, if no adultery
has been committed?
What if, for some reason,
two people who are married to each other
just don’t like each other any longer?
Divorce is not an option.
Instead, they need to remind themselves
of what attracted them to each other
and work at rekindling those feelings,
while at the same time
looking to Jehovah for help
in not only strengthening their marriage
but also their spirituality.
Our fourth question is,
What Scriptural example
is there of a married couple
who believed this one-flesh idea?
Turn to Romans 16:3, please,
Romans 16:3; here Paul writes:
“Give my greetings
to Prisca [or Priscilla] and Aquila,
my fellow workers in Christ Jesus.”
So, yes, Aquila and Priscilla
—what a model of a close and united couple
living up to what Jehovah meant
when he said that a husband or wife
should become one flesh!
And Paul, who worked closely with them,
could not think of that dear brother
without recalling
the faithful cooperation of his wife.
So it’s a fine example
for Christian couples today.
And in every one
of the six references to this couple
in the Christian Greek Scriptures,
we find them working together,
cooperating without competition or strife.
And never is one mentioned without the other.
They constantly worked together
in their home,
in their secular work, in the ministry.
And surely it was the time
spent together in Christian activities
that kept their marriage
on a high spiritual plane,
working side by side
to further the Kingdom work.
Now, you and your marriage mate may be apart
for much of the day
due to different work and responsibilities.
But can you find time each day
to eat meals together,
to do household chores together,
to take walks together,
to be together to get caught up
on what has gone on
in your lives during the day?
Aquila and Priscilla proved that being united
in activities related to true worship
can keep a couple’s thinking
and goals aligned,
and that does strengthen a marriage.
For example, studying together,
participating
in congregation meetings together,
sharing in the ministry together,
praying together,
in doing all of that,
a person’s interests, priorities, and habits
will harmonize with those
of one’s spouse until,
like Aquila and Priscilla,
we increasingly think, feel,
and act as one flesh.
So now we know who said the words.
It was Jehovah.
We understand what they mean
—achieving harmony
in one’s relationship with one’s mate.
And we can certainly prove
that we believe these words
by staying close to our mate
and maintaining our marriage bond.
And then we have that excellent example
of Aquila and Priscilla to abide by.